# Population Health Management for Healthcare

According to Centers for Medicaid and Medicare Services, U.S. health care spending reached $3.2 trillion or $9,990 per person in 2015 accounting for 17.8 percent of the Gross Domestic Product. One-third of this health care expenditure comes from hospital inpatient care. With spending projected to reach $4.8 trillion in 2021 concerted efforts are being made to reduce spending. The recent shift in government payment models from fee-for-service to pay-for-value is aimed specifically at reducing the government’s spending on health care and curtail the growing budget deficits. In this model disease prevention and management is rewarded while poor outcomes are penalized. Population Health Management is an important tool that is increasingly being used by Health care providers to manage and control the escalating costs. The crux of Population Health Management is to use data to improve health outcomes. Tracking, monitoring and bench marking are the three bastions of Population Health Management aimed at improving clinical and health outcomes while managing and reducing cost. A successful population health management initiative requires establishing a repository that can collect data from multiple sources and in all and any formats whether it be structured, semi structured or unstructured. By analyzing patient population and getting an insight into the social-economic and demographic constitution of the population and their overall medical condition across different longitudes the health care providers can get an insight into the quality of care being provided and identify areas of improvement and cost savings. In this solution guide we will be leveraging the clinical and socioeconomic in-patient data (simulated) generated by the hospitals for population health reporting. Additionally, we will also be making predictions for the length of hospital stay. The hospitals can use these results to optimize care management systems and focus the clinical resources on patients with more urgent need. Understanding the community it serves through population health reporting can help the hospitals transition from fee-for-service payments to value-based care while saving costs and providing better care.
