# Population Health Management for Healthcare - A Cortana Intelligence Solution

## Business Problem

The recent legislative changes have standardized payments for procedures performed, regardless of the number of days the patient actually spends in the hospital. The hospitals are hard pressed to use resources more efficiently and find ways to accommodate more patients with the same volume of resources. An accurate prediction of length of stay can help the hospitals in numerous ways. 1) Manage bed occupancy. 2) Effective scheduling of elective admissions 3) Improve patient satisfaction during hospital stay. Extended lengths of stay costs hospitals millions of dollars a year. By identifying patients at risk for an extended stay, they can take proactive measures to formulate a treatment plan to reduce the length of stay.

With the new pay-for-value model disease prevention and management are rewarded financially while there is penalty for poor outcomes. Hospital Readmissions Reduction Program (HRRP) which took effect in 2013, penalizes hospitals with higher-than-expected readmissions. They can compare and track their readmission rates to the national average for other hospitals for some specific clinical conditions included in the program such as heart attack, heart failure, pneumonia, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) and total hip and knee replacements.

The population health management report gives the hospitals insights into the quality of care it provides and the population it serves. They can monitor, trend and benchmark some critical measures. For example an insight into patients and clinical conditions with a higher length of stay, can drive measures to transfer from acute settings which cost more to an appropriate lower cost setting and improved coordination of care. By identifying patients (populations) and factors that contribute to majority of health care charges, they can effectively manage and control the escalating costs as well as improve the health outcomes of patients.